a week after students at Columbia
University in New York first began their
camp in support of Palestine the
protests against Israel's war and Gaza
have spread to college campuses across
the United States the White House says
President Joe Biden supports free speech
and non-discrimination at
universities but there were scuffles at
the University of Texas as police and
state troopers Tred to disperse the
crowds hundreds of students have been
arrested in the US since
Friday we have correspondents covering
the protest from coast to coast John
henin is standing by for us at Columbia
University in New York but first let's
go to Rob Reynolds who joins us from the
University of Southern California so uh
Rob what's the latest you can tell us
from
there well Carrie everything is uh
pretty calm and peaceful right now there
are uh speakers uh making speeches and
leading uh chants uh of for a group of
perhaps a thousand students it's a
little difficult to tell exactly how
many I think the crowd has ebbed and
flowed over the course of the last
several hours uh the students here are
demanding several things including uh
that that stand in solidarity with
Palestinians uh and demanding freedom
for Palestine an end to the occupation
an end to genoci side in Gaza and
Israel's war on Gaza and they're also
more close to home calling for their
University USC which is an elite
institution uh people pay a lot of money
to send their children here or or or
students pay money themselves uh either
way as the case may be it's a very
prestigious University and the students
want it to cut all ties with Israel and
to remove board members MERS uh on the
uh governing board of the uh college or
the university who are uh involved in
the defense industry in the United
States that supplies uh Israel with
weapons and so forth they want to cut
off any study abroad with uh Israeli
colleges or universities uh and they
want in other words a complete clean
break between USC and any Israeli entity
now it's all been very peaceful as as I
said uh during my time here observing
this crowd there have been no uh uh
confrontations or shouting matches
between individual students or anything
of that nature but earlier uh when
students were trying to set up uh tents
in order to have a sort of camping
protest
24-hour uh there were uh some scuffles I
guess you would called them as campus
police who are armed with uh weapons uh
with firearms and clubs and wearing
helmets did intervene they tore down the
tents um at least one student was uh
detained I'm told by protest organizers
uh but then released and a couple of
people were roughed up uh but there were
no serious injuries uh but uh that has
there this is a situation which has been
mirrored as you mentioned Carrie around
the country from coast to coast where
there have been other uh in institions
and colleges and universities where
arrests have been made and this has all
led to a profound debate over the right
of freedom of speech on campus uh on
universities which are dedicated to the
goal of uh fostering free inquiry of uh
of fostering a a culture of um of
Discovery and learning and
self-expression and now those same
institutions are caught in a Crossroads
where there are uh uh instances where
they crack down on that very freedom of
speech and so that is creating uh a
great deal of concern among the students
and among a number of the professors
here at USC and elsewhere Karen okay Rob
thanks very much needed for that let's
uh go live now to John henin who's at
Columbia University in New York John can
you give us a sense of what it's been
like there with these protests
Well Carrie Columbia has a long Legacy
of protests from the Vietnam War to
today but there's a lull at the center
of this particular storm it may be the
epicenter but look around uh you've got
students now putting on an extra layer
after a warm day grows a little chillier
today was a busy one here the speaker of
the US House of Representatives Mike
Johnson came here and he spoke to Jewish
students and condemned
these protests the ones here and across
the country well the students held a
little news conference of their own the
protesters and they made some demands
they said they're protesting the war in
Gaza but they're also protesting their
University they want to know they want
the school to disclose where it's
investing its money they want it to
divest of all Israeli Investments and
they want amnesty for all of the
students that are out here and all of
the other protesters and that presumably
includes the more than 100 who were
arrested here last week since then the
university has given them a new deadline
of midnight local time on Thursday as
talks continue between the student
protesters and the university and as
this Wildfire of protest spreads across
the country but you can see how peaceful
this is right now and one reason the
University president might be looking
for a way out of this conundrum is that
back in 196
another Columbia University president
called in police they violently cleared
out student protesters and that was the
end of that President's stormy tenure
John henin thank you well staying with
this now Jeremy Siri is a professor of
Global Leadership history and public
policy at the University of Texas he
joins us from Austin Texas welcome to
the program we understand that you
witnessed firsthand the student protest
can you tell us what actually
happened sure so I was coming out of the
class I had just taught and it is uh the
history Department uh on campus and I
saw a large group of students not not a
very large group but about 200 students
who had assembled on a grass lawn uh
behind my building uh it's what we call
the South mall and it doesn't block any
buildings it's visible to many people
but it's an area that students often sit
on to study and things of that sort and
these students were shouting free
Palestine uh that's all they had maybe
one or two signs they were saying
nothing anti-semitic they were saying
nothing that was threatening and as they
were standing and shouting I witnessed
the police uh the state police the
campus police the city police uh an army
of police almost the size of the student
group uh collecting themselves many were
carrying uh guns many were carrying
rifles and then within a few minutes uh
this group of police stormed into the
student crack Crow and started arresting
students these students were shouting
free Palestine they were not threatening
anyone they were peaceful they were loud
uh but they were peaceful and they were
not anti-semitic either and the police
just started attacking them and that led
to more shouting more students then
arrived when they saw this and the
situation became more violent but it
became more violent because the police
had attacked the students not the other
way around so what are University
authorities making king of all this then
where is this actually
heading well I believe that University
presidents including my own at the
University of Texas are afraid they are
afraid that they are going to be
criticized and condemned by politicians
by the governor of Texas by members of
Congress they're they're afraid they're
going to be condemned for allowing
anti-Semitism and I'm against
anti-Semitism too I'm Jewish myself I
think anti-Semitism is horrible and
there has been too much of it but this
the presidents are overreacting and what
they're doing is they're creating an
environment in which no one is allowed
to say anything that sounds critical in
any way of Israel or any other topic and
they're making it impossible for
students to express themselves I want
students to express strong opinions I
want them to argue I don't want them to
say anything that's offensive to another
group and I don't want them to use
violence but we're a university we
should be encouraging Free Speech
presidents of universities now are
afraid of free speech and they're
suppressing free speech and that is
terrible we should not allow that to
happen given what you say then could
this eventually lead to some kind of
policy change when it comes to how
institutions react to protests like
this well I hope it will lead to some
sou searching I believed we had a policy
until today at the University of Texas
and a policy I think most major
universities had which is that peaceful
protests were encouraged uh that is
actually what we should be about for
some reason we have abandoned that
policy I would like to see us have a
discussion about returning to that
policy and setting clear guidelines uh
for that policy I do fear there are some
people who want to limit free speech and
limit protests at universities what is
ironic is these are the same people who
a few years ago were saying we didn't
have enough Free Speech the same
conservatives who said that we were
doing too much woke diversity training
are now the same people who don't want
real discussion of other issues uh and
that's very dangerous the lifeblood of
intellectual work is debate and
discussion and from what you've
witnessed then firsthand how strong is
the resolve of
students well the irony is that this
kind of behavior by the police only
increases the resolve of students I
cannot tell you how many students more
than 15 to 20 that I spoke with who I
saw at this event some of whom are
students I know uh were students who
were apathetic or may have even been
favorable to the Israeli side in the
argument and they see the police acting
this way and it leads them to become
more radical uh and this is the story of
the 1960s in our society we're replaying
that when the police attack students in
this way it makes other students
sympathize with those who are attacked
not the
attackers Professor Jeremy Siri thank
you very much indeed for your time thank
you for covering this
story make sure to subscribe to our
channel to get the latest news from Al
jazer